---
author: soetkien
title: 'Dag 30 : Tokio - dag 2'
slug: dag-30-tokio-dag-2
id: 1017
date: '2024-04-16 16:32:47'
layout: post
categories:
  - Geen categorie
---

{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/atelier.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/avond-straat.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/bidprentjes.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/bureau.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/houding-snijden.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/plaat-houtsnede.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/proefplaten.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/rommel-straat.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/print-houtsnede.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/snijden-sample.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/tabi.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag16/vladimir-loopt.jpg" title = "omschrijving" %}

Our first day of lessons with Sensei (Master Snijder) Asaka Motoharu. Cutting is my weakest point in practicing Mokuhanga. I have some mixed emotions - shaky knees but also looking forward to it. On the other hand, he looks quite strict with his moustache. We want to make sure we are on time for our first lesson. We set our alarms early. Vladimir just reads the email that our sensei sent this morning, saying we are only expected by 10 am.
A bit of lazing around, a visit to the 7/11 before we walk to the studio. We are a bit early and have our breakfast on a bench near the local school. A group of toddlers with pink caps (most still in diapers) passes by us. Waving and walking is not easy. They look cute, some clearly have had a tough morning. The last four are pulled along in a wagon. One of them is alert enough to wave back.
We ring the doorbell at the studio, take off our shoes, and immediately step into his workshop. The floor is raised. I barely fit under the ceiling. Try not to think too much about it, but it feels a bit claustrophobic. We sit at low cutting tables. There are six of them, two close together. You can barely walk between them.
Damn. A week of sitting on our knees to cut. That's going to be tough. But no! Sensei Asaka moves my table and shows a hole in the raised floor to put my legs in. So we are sitting on a kind of chair/floor. Phew!
He doesn't speak English, we already knew that from the Japanese emails. There is no interpreter, so he just starts chatting with us in Japanese. Difficult. Later on, he takes his phone and we have to explain to someone who speaks fluent English (Tarran) what exactly we want to learn. It gets translated.
Meanwhile, Alexandra has arrived, an American married to a Japanese man who has been living here for four years. She wants to become a professional cutter and will interpret for us all week. The process to become a pro is no joke. You can only become an 'apprentice' if the master asks you. You have to prove your skills, work hard, and hope for that request to come... Then follows a seven-year training.
We each get a board with exercises attached. The sensei shows us how to sit, hold our knives, and how to cut. We show him our knives and have to measure them to fit our hands. Turns out they are way too thick and rough for his liking. He thinks it's better to shorten the handle. He starts to dismantle my knife and wants to put on a smaller handle. In the end, we both buy a studio knife tailored to our size.
It's tough. My hands sweat so much that I can barely hold my knife. "Relax SoetekinSan_" he says a few times. It quickly becomes clear who the sensei is between the two of us. Vladimir gets some approving grunts, Asaka says he is already experienced. Luckily, I chose the easier board and Vladimir the more difficult one.
We do our best and go for it, each at our own pace, to the best of our ability. Our sensei is a joker, a kind and gentle man. He is a good teacher, and there was no need to be afraid of him :)
At noon, we go together to a hotel (which probably had its heyday during the time of Dynasty) nearby to eat. I choose fish with creamy Yuzu sauce. Mmmm. Soup and coffee as much as you want. We each pay our share, the sensei goes to pay. Small problem, the bill is incorrect. Women get a discount on Tuesdays. Yes!
The Sensei likes my shoes. Real traditional Japanese ones, he says. He wears socks where each toe is separate. That creates a bond. We become friends. By the way, my tabi fit fantastically.
We toil on until a quarter to five and are given some homework. We take a walk to the Familymart to buy our dinner and I happen to see two pots of melon ice cream in the freezer! What joy! Terry had such a pot in his studio that he used for the nori. He specially drove with us to the restaurant where he got it so we could have one too. Unfortunately, they were no longer on the menu. But fate is on our side, we can now also put our nori in such a cool pot for our kamishibai! We have to sacrifice ourselves to eat the melon ice cream.
After dinner, we diligently work on our homework. The only table in our apartment is Japanese. Unfortunately, no leg pit in the floor.
Vladimir cuts an almost perfect circle. Progress is already visible in mine. Let's say I have my good and not-so-good moments.