---
author: soetkien
title: 'Dag 29: Tokio - dag 1'
slug: dag-28-tokio-dag-1
id: 997
date: '2024-04-15 15:47:31'
layout: post
categories:
  - Geen categorie
---
It seems like it's going to be 25 degrees today. The sun is shining brightly. I left my light on too late yesterday, too late for a room with paper curtains, right?

I'm thinking about my husband, tomorrow marks the beginning of a new chapter for him. It's his first day at his new job. I wish we could talk again. He's not responding to my messages anymore, he must be asleep, wise of him.

Today, we have a 'day off'. We're heading to Kabuki-za where we'll watch three Kabuki performances from 11 am to 3:31 pm. Very curious to see what that's going to be like. The actors are all men - a consequence of actresses being harassed by lustful men after performances long ago. That was not tolerated, so since then, all roles are played by men.

The theater itself is an experience. You take the escalator to the third floor. There are shops and even a restaurant. Guards everywhere, of course. Something could go wrong.

The performances start right on time. My knees barely fit between the seats. I've never felt so small. Next to Vladimir, there's an American lady who's even taller than me. There are four empty seats next to me. I want to move to give everyone some space, but I'm immediately corrected. Not allowed. No photos, no eating. I dare to drink - some locals do it very discreetly, so I do too.

The play is fantastic. A peculiar mix of theater and performance. The sets are beautiful, as are the costumes. It truly feels like the old prints have come to life. Occasionally, the actors freeze their poses. Then, a guard at the back of the hall loudly chants something - the name of the actor in question, we're told later. So, if you play an important role, your name is chanted at key scenes. Good for your name recognition.

The first piece is about a sumo wrestler, blessed with a thick head of hair, who killed someone. His old mother shaves his hair off on stage. The second piece, just after noon, is lighter. Mostly singing and dancing. The gods drunkenly sail around in a boat and dance. Funny.

The highlight of the day is the last performance. The life of a fishmonger from the Edo period. It's a complicated story with many characters. Exciting, moving, sprinkled with humor. It's hard to follow. Luckily, we know the main actor wears red underwear and has lots of tattoos. There's live English translation through an earpiece, what a relief!

Suddenly, Vladimir suspiciously leans close to me. Ah, he's dozing off. In a Japanese way, he can doze off and then sit up fresh as a daisy. Later on, I feel my eyes closing too. It goes up and down like that. However, the climax of the story is not something to fall asleep to: a fight, murder, mud and dirt, and especially beautiful imagery. Unforgettable.
Wow. I'd come back tomorrow in a heartbeat.

After the performance, we both have a date. I'm meeting Mia O, one of the mokuhanga sisters. Vladimir is meeting an ex-classmate from 17 years ago. We're going our separate ways. I have a lovely afternoon. It feels like Mia and I have known each other for years. We say goodbye and promise to stay in touch. Something I've done a few times on this trip.

Noodles at the bar around the corner to end the day. Then a dessert in our apartment, showering, and blogging. 
Ready for tomorrow, for Master Asaka Motoharu.