---
author: Soetkin
title: Day 11 | Karuizawa (3)
date: 2024-06-06
blog-date: 2024-04-11
layout: post
tags:
  - japan
image: dag11/borstels.jpg
---
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag11/ochtend-met-kimono.jpg"  title = "room in morninglight with kimono hanging in front of the window" %}

The night was less cold than the previous night. I didn't turn off my electric blanket, leaving it on the lowest setting. Vladimir told me yesterday that he had been so cold that he had wrapped his T-shirt around his head. I wonder how he looked last night.

There has been a lot of running back and forth in front of the door to my room this morning. It is making me wake up quite early. That's one of the drawbacks of paper walls. Terry's study, toilet and kitchen are next to my room. 

{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag11/borstels.jpg"  title = "display of mokuhanga brushes" %}

We have breakfast on the terrace in the sun. Fresh, but nicer than in the cold kitchen, in my opinion. Vladimir isn't too keen on the idea, but it's the second time we've had dinner outside. Which is appreciated by me.

A visit to the local hardware store. The squirters we have been in search of are out of stock. V. decides to buy a Japanese saw. A few more pieces of tape and small items are added to the shopping trolley.

A small addition to the suitcase theme. We start to list what still needs to be bought. An additional suitcase is already on the list.

Before lunch we cut our paper and prepare the packs for printing. Terry discusses his experience of printing with gouache, pigments, types of ink and so on. He brings out a box of gold shavings, his mica collection (for printing Kira Kira), foil and a portfolio of test prints. The research is fascinating. It is an inspiration to see the way in which he does his research and can share it with others.

{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag11/koffie-en-verf.jpg"  title = "room in morninglight with kimono hanging in front of the window" %}

Cutting, drawing, gossiping and laughing fill the rest of the day. Vladimir uses a piece of wood to extend his plate. Terry gets out his super staple gun for the job.

{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag11/nieten.jpg"  title = "room in morninglight with kimono hanging in front of the window" %}

Apart from that, there is not a lot of spectacular things to tell you about this day. I get to know more about my master - [and he's taste in music](https://www.google.com/search?client=safari&sca_esv=fd299e0f5b2672c9&sca_upv=1&hl=nl-be&q=&si=AKbGX_rtvl4gHjpzPKpYolykTK-DwT7ha6dJftcynCd9eVgGN0Fxv1U9w4a8OKPmTXLV-G0t8hVszqnHfSQrjU8vIf8BnQdVUe-sLiNI-Lx-4YrZSReyLlEHtWn46loKCh1OgqDKMD9p&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjzn-bVw7qFAxXla_UHHckED8IQv_UKKAB6BAgYEAE&biw=375&bih=547&dpr=2).

{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag11/vladimir-snijdt.jpg"  title = "room in morninglight with kimono hanging in front of the window" %}

[The golden poo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kin_no_unko) I honestly earned yesterday goes from my bank to my fellow countryman's bank. Tomorrow I'll buy some extra tasty biscuits for Terry. I hope to win it back!

His new home. Not for long, though!

{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag11/kak-soetkin.jpg"  title = "room in morninglight with kimono hanging in front of the window" %}
{% include blog-image.html image-name = "dag11/kak-vladimir.jpg"  title = "room in morninglight with kimono hanging in front of the window" %}


